Getting started guide for testing (#1298)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/testing/getting-started/_index.md

To simplify using function-level test reporting, O3DE provides wrapper code to register tests for frameworks such as GoogleTest and PyTest into CTest. These wrappers enable writing tests which run on any operating system. XML files are generated to track the low-level results not reported in CTest, as well as artifacts such as log output and crash dumps.

In short, all tests in O3DE use CTest as a high level test coordinator. When executed, CTest calls other lower-level test tools and then reports on their success.

![CTest calls other test runners](/images/user-guide/testing/getting-started/ctest_to_runners.png)

### Starting CTest

CTest expects its working directory to be a CMake build directory, so be sure to first move into this directory:

```shell
cd <local_path_to>/o3de/build/<build_folder>
ctest -C <build_configuration>
```

> You may not want to run the commands above without also filtering the set of tests which run. Without a filter the command will kick off every test, and likely result in multiple hours of test execution! If you ever want to stop CTest, send an interrupt signal by selecting the terminal and pressing `CTRL + C` . The most commonly used suites are Smoke and Main, which are required to run quickly. The following ctest command filters to only tests in these two suites:

Author: Will define "suites" as well as change this toward "these suites have requirements to run quickly"

I think enforcing the execution time should be out of scope for a getting started guide, as it falls to SIG-Testing and SIG-Build to define.

> You may not want to run the commands above without also filtering the set of tests which run. Without a filter the command will kick off every test, and likely result in multiple hours of test execution! If you ever want to stop CTest, send an interrupt signal by selecting the terminal and pressing `CTRL + C` . The most commonly used suites are Smoke and Main, which are required to run quickly. The following ctest command filters to only tests in these two suites:

Reviewer: The sentence is still grammatically ambiguous, there are two possible readings:
1. Fast execution requires smoke and main.
2. Smoke and main require fast execution.
I think option 1 is the intended meaning, both could be true.

> You may not want to run the commands above without also filtering the set of tests which run. Without a filter the command will kick off every test, and likely result in multiple hours of test execution! If you ever want to stop CTest, send an interrupt signal by selecting the terminal and pressing `CTRL + C` . The most commonly used suites are Smoke and Main, which are required to run quickly. The following ctest command filters to only tests in these two suites:

Author: 2 is essentially the intended meaning. "There are requirements for smoke and main to execute fast"

```shell
cd <local_path_to>/o3de/build/<build_folder>
ctest -C <build_configuration> -L "(SUITE_smoke|SUITE_main)"
```

> The build configuration should be one you have already built locally. Running the Smoke and Main suites for the `profile` build configuration on a Linux machine should look like:

Author: "Should be already built locally" seems ambiguous about who owns the action of performing that build.

```
set(FILES
    test/MyModuleTestFile.cpp
    test/MyModuleMathTests.cpp
)
```

#### Step 2: Register the test module

The final CMakeLists.txt step is to register the module with CTest. For this, use helper function `ly_add_googletest()`

To verify everything is set up correctly, run the [CMake configure command](/docs/user-guide/build/configure-and-build/) from the CMake CLI or CMake GUI. This will register everything you just added, and emit errors if anything was misconfigured.

#### Step 3: Write new tests

Now that you have configured CMake to create a library from your tests, and registered this library with CTest, you are ready to write new tests. To simplify your module structure, create new test files inside `o3de/.../<MyModule>/tests/`

Tests are written using standard [GoogleTest](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/main/docs/index.md) syntax, which helps you write small functions to test your code. To pull in everything from GoogleTest plus a few convienient tools, add the following statement to your file:

```cpp
#include <AzTest/AzTest.h>
```

> To keep test functions legible at a glance, we recommend using the [Osherove Naming Convention](https://osherove.com/blog/2005/4/3/naming-standards-for-unit-tests.html) of `UnitOfWork_StateUnderTest_ExpectedBehavior`. This can be especially helpful when reading a report with many individual test case failures. In a short a C++ example:

Author: Need to resolve a minor conflict between this naming recommendation, and one from GoogleTest: http://google.github.io/googletest/faq.html#why-should-test-suite-names-and-test-names-not-contain-underscore

Reviewer 2: Can we also mention that this is only a recommendation and that not all tests follow this approach. A lot of the tests I've written use a style where we just describe the behavior under test (e.g. `MouseMoveCorrectlyTransformsCursorPositionInGlobalAndLocalSpace`) I don't think we should encourage one over the other necessarily, it can also be useful to potentially make the sentence more readable to allow this - `Mouse_move_correctly_transforms_cursor_position_in_global_and_local_space` (this doesn't have to explicitly be in the docs, but I think we should have more than example of test names.

Reviewer 2: (loads of good advice on this in this book - https://www.amazon.co.uk/Modern-Programming-Test-Driven-Development-Better/dp/1937785483/ref=sr_1_1?crid=39B88RBW10B11&keywords=Modern+C%2B%2B+Programming+with+Test-Driven+Development%3A+Code+Better%2C+Sleep+Better&qid=1641490223&sprefix=modern+c%2B%2B+programming+with+test-driven+development+code+better+sleep+better%2Caps%2C398&sr=8-1) 🙂

Reviewer 2: I also like this general advice

> A test should describe a behaviour you would like to test
> The test name should form a sentence describing the behaviour under test
> Avoid using words like 'Check', 'Verify', 'Assert' - they are redundant and clutter the test name

Author: +1 on clarifying the recommendation. Though I don't want to go too deep on general advice in the getting-started guide, as there is another best-practices guide planned and that information is slightly more of an  advanced concept.

...perhaps naming advice should not even be mentioned here?

Reviewer 2: Got you, yes this can totally be in the more advanced guide that would be great to link to from here. I agree maybe talking about naming at all can be reserved for that doc?

{
    // (function under test would be called here)
    ASSERT_TRUE(someErrorState);
    EXPECT_TRUE(someResult);
    EXPECT_FALSE(secondaryProperty);
}
```

For more information on writing tests in C++, see [Using AzTest](/docs/user-guide/testing/aztest/aztest/).

## GoogleBenchmark

For performance benchmarks of small pieces of C++ code O3DE uses [GoogleBenchmark](https://github.com/google/benchmark/blob/main/docs/index.md), which is quite similar to GoogleTest. However how failure is defined is a major difference between a normal test and a benchmark. In most tests, pass/fail status is directly evaluated into a boolean state. Benchmarks instead create a subjective performance metric. These metrics are most valuable when periodically recorded, to help detect trends. The only objective failure during a benchmark occurs when the code fails to run or crashes.

The steps for configuring a GoogleBenchmark library are identical to the [steps above for GoogleTest libraries](#googletest), with a couple exceptions. The include statement is `#include <benchmark/benchmark.h>` and the cmake helper function is:

```
ly_add_googlebenchmark(
    NAME MyModule.Benchmarks
)
```

## PyTest

> Certain tests are easier to write in a scripting language like Python. The scope of these tests are typically at the [integration level](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/integration-testing/), verifying mid-to-high level functionality of workflows and overall system sanity. Additionally, any Python-based tools will prefer unit tests written in Python. For these tests O3DE uses [PyTest](https://docs.pytest.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain tests are easier to write in a scripting language like Python. The scope of these tests are typically at the [integration level](https://softwaretestingfundamentals.com/integration-testing/), verifying mid-to-high level functionality of workflows and overall system soundness. Additionally, any Python-based tools will prefer unit tests written in Python. For these tests O3DE uses [PyTest](https://docs.pytest.org/).
```

Author: "Sanity" is a common term in the testing community, whereas "soundness" is surprising to me. Is there a reason to prefer this change? Does the term "sanity" need to be better defined?

Reviewer: I think that would help; as a reader, I'm unsure how aspects of an overall system sanity check differ from a check of mid-to-high level functionality of workflows.

While interpreted languages like Python can have low performance, these tests should not perform heavy computation in Python. Tests should instead focus on coordinating workflows: signalling events and then verifying a response. Leave heavy operations to the code targeted by a test.

There are often two Python interpreter instances used during O3DE tests. This can complicate determining which will execute your code, so pay close attention to how the test is defined:

> - #1 Exists outside of the O3DE Editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test exists outside of **O3DE Editor**
```

>   - Use in generic tests which launch applications and send external signals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Use in generic tests that launch applications and send external signals.
```

>   - Helps and monitor for application crashes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Helps and monitors for application crashes.
```

Author: "Helps and" should be removed

>   - Test file names should start with `test_`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Test file names should start with `test_`.
```

>   - Same Python interpreter that launches when you run `o3de/python/python.sh` or `o3de\python\python.cmd`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Uses the same Python interpreter that launches when you run `o3de/python/python.sh` or `o3de\python\python.cmd`.
```

> - #2 Embedded inside the O3DE Editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test embedded inside O3DE Editor
```

>   - Use in "EditorPythonBindings" tests which target workflows inside the editor

Reviewer 3: Do we have or plan to have an EPB doc to link to?

Author: The "parallel-pattern" doc is all that currently exists for EPB, which is already linked to elsewhere within this guide. I wasn't sure this use also needed a link.

The other guide is currently a bit thin on introducing the system, especially for its non-testing usage.

>   - Use in "EditorPythonBindings" tests which target workflows inside the editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Use in `EditorPythonBindings` tests which target workflows inside O3DE Editor.
```

>   - Helps expose editor functionality to a test script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Helps expose editor functionality to a test script.
```

>   - Test file names should ***not*** include affixes such as `test_` or `_tests`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Test file names should ***not*** include affixes such as `test_` or `_tests`.
```

>   - PyTest is still initiated by the external python, to handle editor crashes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - PyTest is still initiated by the external Python interpreter instance, to handle Editor crashes.
```

> ### Registering a new Python Test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Registering a new Python test
```

> Registering a Python-based test is simpler than registering a C++ test. However it similarly requires you define the library that will be tested. The steps below assume you have already defined a production library. You can read more about defining production code in [Getting Started with the CMake Build System](/docs/user-guide/build/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Registering a Python-based test is simpler than registering a C++ test. However, it also requires you define the library that will be tested. The steps below assume you have already defined a production library. You can read more about defining production code in [Getting Started with the CMake Build System](/docs/user-guide/build/).
```

> #### Step 1: Register a PyTest Target

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 1: Register a PyTest target
```

> Find the CMakeLists.txt that defines the system you are testing. It should exist at a path similar to `o3de/.../<MyModule>/CMakeLists.txt` . Note that it may instead be appropriate to register broader tests in a parent directory's CMakeLists.txt. If you are creating a test that is specific to a game project, you should register it in a CMakeLists.txt in that game project. When you find the right place for the test to be registered, add a line similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find the `CMakeLists.txt` that defines the system you are testing. It should exist at a path similar to `o3de/.../<MyModule>/CMakeLists.txt`. Note that it may be appropriate to register broader tests in a parent directory's CMakeLists.txt instead. If you are creating a test that is specific to a game project, you should register it in a `CMakeLists.txt` in that game project. When you find the right place for the test to be registered, add a line similar to:
```

```
ly_add_pytest(
    NAME myPythonTest 
    PATH ${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/Tests/test_MyFile.py
    TEST_SERIAL # many larger-than-unit tests can interfere with one another in parallel
    RUNTIME_DEPENDENCIES # helps the test build-and-run from an IDE
        Legacy::Editor
        AZ::AssetProcessor
        AutomatedTesting.Assets
)
```

To verify everything is set up correctly, run the [CMake configure command](/docs/user-guide/build/configure-and-build/) from the CMake CLI or CMake GUI. This will register everything you just added, and emit errors if anything was misconfigured.

#### Step 2: Write new Python tests

> These tests primarily use standard [Python](https://docs.python.org/3/) code along with [PyTest](https://docs.pytest.org/). Depending on where your test is focused, it likely wants to include one of two automation libraries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tests primarily use standard [Python](https://docs.python.org/3/) code along with [PyTest](https://docs.pytest.org/). Depending on where your test is focused, it should likely include one of two automation libraries:
```

> Internal tests of the O3DE Editor functionality should use [EditorPythonBindings](/docs/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/). This helps expose C++ interfaces of the Editor to Python. These tests almost always require the `TEST_SERIAL` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal tests of O3DE Editor functionality should use [EditorPythonBindings](/docs/user-guide/testing/parallel-pattern/). This helps expose editor C++ interfaces to Python. These tests almost always require the `TEST_SERIAL` flag.
```

> External tests at the Operating System level often use the [LyTestTools](/docs/user-guide/testing/lytesttools/) module, which simplifies interacting with O3DE applications. Tests using these tools are discussed more at . These tests often use the `TEST_SERIAL` flag.

Reviewer 3: The TEST_SERIAL flag might already be automatically added to all pytests, not 100% sure but may be worth checking into

Author: Confirmed it is not enabled by default

> External tests at the Operating System level often use the [LyTestTools](/docs/user-guide/testing/lytesttools/) module, which simplifies interacting with O3DE applications. Tests using these tools are discussed more at . These tests often use the `TEST_SERIAL` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
External tests at the operating system level often use the [LyTestTools](/docs/user-guide/testing/lytesttools/) module, which simplifies interacting with O3DE applications. Tests using these tools are discussed more at . These tests often use the `TEST_SERIAL` flag.
```
> Tests using these tools are discussed more at . 

You wanted to include a link here.

Author: Desired documentation does not yet exist, deleting sentence.
